# Mathematical collections

If we consider math start from nothing at all, it is not too hard to conjure up a notion of set as a grouping mechanism, except we wouldn't have anything to group. However, recognizing a set itself as a mathematical object, we can put one set into another. Since we initially have no other objects but an empty set, `{}` or `∅`, we can only do one thing - put the empty set in a set, `{∅}`. And then we have two objects, `∅` and `{∅}`, as well as set-as-a-collection which lets us form new sets, thereby obtaining new objects to group.

But how should the fact that sets do not allow repetition of elements be explained naturally? That is, it would seem that multisets, that do allow elements to be repeated, are a more natural collection than sets. A mutliset, also called a bag, unlike set, has no strange properties - even if we put the same object twice, the two copies do not mysteriously collapse into a single one. But maybe that's just it - how can we make copies of an object in the first place? Well, it could be said that we do it by construction, without even meaning to make copies. We make a set {∅} and put in a set labelled A, and then we make another {∅} and put it also in A, but when we examine A, there is only one set {∅}. Perhaps, set has the 'meta' ability to transform instances into their true form. By placing multiple copies of the same object in the set A, we are aggregating various instances of that object, but they all collapse into their one true form, the single 'true' object {∅}. That seems like a load of crap, but, anyway, set do seem to come with the capability to reduce the redundant object instances into one true identity of that object.

Multisets, on the hand, do not share this ability so they may be more fundamental. But, for example, if we have an opaque set, knowing only that it contains natural numbers, we could find out about its contents only by querying it with yes/no questions, e.g. "is 0 in the set?". But that way, we wouldn't be able to tell apart a set from a multiset, nor we could ever be certain about which actual elements it contains.
