# Graphing functions

Functions have the general form `f(x) = y` which perfectly reflects the fact the x values (function inputs) are plotted on the horizontal x-axis, while y values (outputs) are plotted on the vertical y-axis.

In this general form `f(x) = y`, variable `x` is an independent variable, ranging over the `dom(f)` specified in the function type, usually `f : A → B`, which is a genral form of a function signature that gives the source and target sets (which are often the same set), e.g. `f : ℚ → ℤ` is an integer-valued function, and `f : ℕ → 𝔹` is a Boolean-valued function. However, a function with the signature `f : ℤ → ℤ` is an integer function, and `f : 𝔹 → 𝔹` is a Boolean function. So, the codomain set, in general `B`, determines that the function is *B-valued* with respect to the generic signature, `f : A → B`. There is no term for emphasizing just the domain set `A`. When domain and codomain sets are the same, `f : A → A`, then it is an `A`-function. Therefore, a *real function* necessarily has the type `f : ℝ → ℝ`, while a *real-valued function* the type `f : A → ℝ`, where the domain set `A` is left unspecified.

Variable `x` is independent, while variable `y` is dependent. Namely, `y` variable depends on the value of `x` variable. Variable `x` ranges over the domain, taking on any value in that set. It is free to take on any `x`-value (domain element). On the other hand, variable `y` ranges over the codomain set of the function, but it is not free to take on any value from there. It may only take a particular value that corresponds to `x`. Every possible `x` value is associated with a particular `y` value. Moreover, each `x` is associated to exactly one `y` value. Because we are discussing *total function*, the qualifier "total" if often dropped, and a possible use of a *partial function* is explicit. (Total) functions are so called because all elements (values) of the domain set participate in the functional relation, which is not the case with partial functions.

Issue: technically, a function that is not defined at each and every domain value should be qualified as being partial, e.g. the division function is partial. However, math (at least e.g. geometry) prefers to relocate this issue rather then to call a function partial. Instead, the issue is moved and it is now the responsibility of the function type. Namely, the domain of the function is permitted to become more granular, so it can express possible holes (i.e. values at which the function is undefined). For example, rather then specifying that the division function, `(÷) : ℝ → ℝ` is partial, its domain is instead specified more granularly, as the union of two intervals, `(-∞, 0) ∪ (0, ∞)`; or, alternatively and equivalently, as a set difference `ℝ ∖ {0}` or using a decorated symbol `ℝ⃰` to mean the same. It becomes hard to stuff all this info into a function's signature that expresses its type and so such practice is avoided, with the function type stated in a mix of prose and formulas.

## Equations define "static" curves

The equation for a function, e.g. for one of the simplest functions `y = x`, aka the identity function, is *static*. That is, equations define curves but once plotted the curves are static. This may be not as intuitive considering that a function has variables which are dynamic by nature. However, the `x`'s and `y`'s in an equations like `y = mx + b` are static (fixed). When this equation is plotted, we get a line and then this line remains in place - it is static. So, despite `x` being a variable and an independent variable at that it cannot influence the dynamics of the plotted line. Thus, variables like `x` and `y` present in equations should be interpreted not as parameters (which can influence e.g. the rendering or the plot of the curve), but as "already determined" set of values. All `x`'s from the domain ahve been paired with corresponding `y`'s from the codomain (or better, from the range) and are now *rendered static in the Cartesian plane*.
