## Chomsky hierarchy

In automata (formal languages and formal grammars), **Chomsky hierarchy** describes the relations between various languages and kinds of formalized logic.

Chomsky hierarchy is a containment hierarchy of classes of formal grammars.

This hierarchy of grammars was described by Noam Chomsky in 1956. It is also named after Marcel-Paul Schützenberger, who played a crucial role in the development of the theory of formal languages, when it is called Chomsky-Schützenberger hierarchy.

## The hierarchy

The following table summarizes each of 
Chomsky's 4 types of grammars, 
the class of language it generates, 
the type of automaton that recognizes it, and 
the form its rules must have.


Grammar | Languages               | Automaton                            | Production rules  | Example
--------|-------------------------|--------------------------------------|-------------------|-----------------------------------------------
Type-0  | Recursively enumerable  | Turing machine                       | γ → α             | L = { w      ¦ w describes a terminating TM }
Type-1  | Context-sensitive       | Linear-bounded non-deterministic TM  | αAβ → αγβ         | L = { aⁿbⁿcⁿ ¦ n > 0 }
Type-2  | Context-free            | Non-deterministic PDA                | A → α             | L = { aⁿ bⁿ  ¦ n > 0 }
Type-3  | Regular Language        | Finite state automaton               | A → a and A → aB  | L = { aⁿ     ¦ n ≥ 0 }


Meaning of symbols:
- a = terminal
- A, B = non-terminal
- α, β, γ = string of terminals and/or non-terminals
- α, β = maybe empty
- γ = never empty


>RL ⊂ CF ⊂ CS ⊂ RE

Every regular language is context-free, every context-free language is context-sensitive, every context-sensitive language is recursive and every recursive language is recursively enumerable.

These are all proper inclusions, meaning that there exist recursively enumerable languages that are not context-sensitive, context-sensitive languages that are not context-free and context-free languages that are not regular.

Note that the set of grammars corresponding to *recursive languages* is not a member of this hierarchy; these would be properly between Type-0 and Type-1.



Chom| Grammars             | Languages             | Abstract machines
----|----------------------|-----------------------|--------------------------
Ty-0| Unrestricted         | Recursively enumerable| TM
-   | (no common name)     | Decidable             | Decider
Ty-1| Context-sensitive    | Context-sensitive     | Linear-bounded
-   | Positive range concat| Positive range concat | PTIME TM
-   | Indexed              | Indexed               | Nested stack
-   | -                    | -                     | Thread automaton
-   | Linear CF rewrite sys| Linear CF rewrite lang| Restricted treestack aut
-   | Tree-adjoining       | Tree-adjoining        | Embedded PDA
Ty-2| Context-free (CF)    | Context-free          | Nondeterministic PDA
-   | Deterministic CF     | Deterministic CF      | Deterministic PDA
-   | Visibly PDA          | Visibly PDA           | Visibly PDA
Ty-3| Regular              | Regular               | Finite
-   | -                    | Star-free             | Counter-free
-   | Non-recursive        | Finite                | Acyclic finite



- Each category of languages, except those marked by an asterisk, is a proper subset of the category directly above it.
- Any language in each category is generated by a grammar and by an automaton in the category in the same line.
