* OneTab
chrome-extension://chphlpgkkbolifaimnlloiipkdnihall/onetab.html

* Bookmarks
chrome://bookmarks/?id=84771

* Category Theory for Programmers: The Preface |   Bartosz Milewski's Programming Cafe
https://bartoszmilewski.com/2014/10/28/category-theory-for-programmers-the-preface/

* BFLIX | Watch Beirut (2018) Online Free on bflix.to
https://web.bflix.to/movie/beirut-4j01x/1-full

* Things that amuse me
http://augustss.blogspot.com/2007/10/simpler-easier-in-recent-paper-simply.html

* Rewriting - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rewriting

* Word problem (mathematics) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Word_problem_(mathematics)

* Knuth-Bendix completion algorithm - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knuth%E2%80%93Bendix_completion_algorithm

* Confluence (abstract rewriting) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Confluence_(abstract_rewriting)

* Closure (mathematics) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Closure_(mathematics)#Binary_relation_closures

* Newman's lemma - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newman%27s_lemma

* Convergence (logic) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convergence_(logic)

* Critical pair (term rewriting) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Critical_pair_(term_rewriting)

* Substitution (logic) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Substitution_(logic)#First-order_logic

* Unification (computer science) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unification_(computer_science)#Syntactic_unification_of_first-order_terms

* Term (logic) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Term_(logic)#Operations_with_terms

* Rewriting - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rewriting#Term_rewriting_systems

* Term (logic) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Term_(logic)#Operations_with_terms

* Knuth-Bendix completion algorithm - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knuth%E2%80%93Bendix_completion_algorithm

* Category:Rewriting systems - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Rewriting_systems

* Abstract rewriting system - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_rewriting_system#Termination_and_convergence

* Closure (mathematics) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Closure_(mathematics)#Binary_relation_closures

* Dershowitz-Manna ordering - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dershowitz%E2%80%93Manna_ordering

* Divergence (computer science) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Divergence_(computer_science)

* Encompassment ordering - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Encompassment_ordering

* Overlap (term rewriting) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Overlap_(term_rewriting)

* Orthogonality (term rewriting) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orthogonality_(term_rewriting)

* Markov algorithm - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markov_algorithm

* Gr√∂bner basis - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gr%C3%B6bner_basis

* Jean-Pierre Jouannaud - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jean-Pierre_Jouannaud

* Explicit substitution - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Explicit_substitution

* Rewriting - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rewriting#Termination

* Symmetric closure - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symmetric_closure

* Semi-Thue system - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semi-Thue_system

* Rewrite order - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rewrite_order

* Reflexive closure - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reflexive_closure

* Rewrite order - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rewrite_order

* Abstract rewriting system - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_rewriting_system

* Path ordering (term rewriting) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Path_ordering_(term_rewriting)

* Normal form (abstract rewriting) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Normal_form_(abstract_rewriting)

* Formal language - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Formal_language
