# GLOSSARY: Philosophy

<!-- TOC -->

- [Accident](#accident)
- [Analytic-synthetic distinction](#analytic-synthetic-distinction)
- [Axiology](#axiology)
- [Essence](#essence)
- [Extremal](#extremal)
- [Fallacy](#fallacy)
- [Noumenon](#noumenon)
- [Phenomenon](#phenomenon)
- [Philosophical logic](#philosophical-logic)

<!-- /TOC -->


## Accident
Accident is a property that the entity has contingently, without which it still retains its identity. Accident is contrasted with essence, which is the property that makes an entity fundamentally what it is, which it has by necessity, without which it loses its identity. 

## Analytic-synthetic distinction
The analytic-synthetic dichotomy is a semantic distinction, used primarily in philosophy to distinguish propositions into two types: analytic propositions and synthetic propositions. Analytic propositions are true by virtue of their meaning, while synthetic propositions are true by how their meaning relates to the world.

## Axiology
Axiology is the philosophical study of value. It is either the collective term for ethics and aesthetics, philosophical fields that depend crucially on notions of worth, or the foundation for these fields, and thus similar to value theory and meta-ethics.

## Essence
Essence is the property that makes an entity what it fundamentally is, which it has by necessity, without which it loses its identity. Essence is contrasted with accident, which is a property that the entity has contingently, without which it still retains its identity.

## Extremal
The clause in a recursive definition that specifies that no items other than those generated by the stated rules fall within the definition; e.g. "0 is an natural number; if n is a natural number, then S(n) is a natural number, and nothing else is a natural number".

## Fallacy
In reasoning to argue a claim, a fallacy is reasoning that is evaluated as logically incorrect and that undermines the logical validity of the argument and permits its recognition as unsound.

## Noumenon
Noumenon is a posited object or event that exists independently of human sense or perception. Noumenon is contrasted with phenomenon, which refers to anything that can be apprehended by (or is an object of) the senses.

## Phenomenon
The term "phenomenon" refers to anything that can be apprehended by (or is an object of) the senses. Phenomenon is contrasted with noumenon, which is a posited object or event that exists independently of human sense or perception.

## Philosophical logic
Philosophical logic refers to those areas of philosophy in which recognized methods of logic have traditionally been used to solve or advance the discussion of philosophical problems. Among these are the study of argument, meaning, and truth, but also of identity, existence, predication, necessity and truth. Philosophical logic also addresses extensions and alternatives to traditional classical logics, known as non-classical logics.
