# 4. Pi
(4. Easy a pie)

An eliminator for `(Pair Nat Nat)`
must expose information in a particular `(Pair Nat Nat)` 
and an eliminator for `(Pair Nat Atom)` 
must expose information in a particular `(Pair Nat Atom)`.

But this would imply that there are lots of eliminators for Pair, because it is always possible to nest them more deeply. However, it is possible to provide an eliminator for `(Pair A D)`, no matter what types `A` and `D` are.

```
(claim kar
  (-> (Pair Nat Nat)
    Nat))
(define kar
  (λ (p)
    (elim-Pair
      Nat Nat
      Nat
      p
      (λ (a d)
        a))))
```

In this definition, `elim-Pair` (still undefined) has the type `Nat` for its first 3 args. The first two specify the types of the `car` and the `cdr` of the `Pair` to be eliminated; thus, the types of the args `a` and `d` in the inner λ-expression are also `Nat`. The third `Nat` specifies that the inner λ-expression results in a `Nat`. The inner λ-expression describes how to use the information in `p`'s value. That info is the `car` and the `cdr` of `p`.

In general, `elim-Pair` is used like this:

```hs
(elim-Pair
  A D
  X
  p
  f)
```

where `p` is a `(Pair A D)` and `f` determines the value of the expression from the car and the cdr of `p`. This value must have type `X`.

What is `elim-Pair`'s type? Here is a guess. It could be

```hs
(-> A D
    X
    (Pair A D)
    (-> A D
      X)
  X)
```

because `A`, `D`, and `X` are the first 3 args, 
the fourth argument is a `(Pair A D)`, and 
the fifth argument is a maker for `X` based on an `A` and a `D`.

Names that occur in an expression must
refer to either a definition or to an
argument named by a λ. There is clearly
no λ in that expression, and neither A
nor D nor X are defined.

So, this must mean that the last expression above is not a type.

Recall what it means to be an

```
(-> Y
X)
```

`(-> Y X)` ≅ `(Y -> X)` is a λ-exp that, when given a `Y`, results in an `X`. It can also be an exp whose value is such a λ-exp.

+ In the proposed type for elim-Pair, are A, D, and X type constructors?
- No, they are not the same kind of expression as Nat and Atom, because they can be different each time elim-Pair is applied, but Nat is always Nat.
- So are they names that are defined to mean types?
+ No, because they can be different each time elim-Pair is applied, but once a name is defined, it always means the same thing.
+ The eliminator must be able to talk about any types A, D, and X.
- It sounds like `->` can't do the job
+ It can't, but `Π` can.
