# Dimensions

## Rant about dimensions

Point is the only geometric object in 0D space. In fact, 0D space is the point. There is nothing but a point in 0D, nor is there room for anything else. Since all dimensions have coordinates consisting of an n-tuple for n-dimensional space, in 0D the coordinates are described by 0-tuple (empty product), `()`, which means there is only one point in 0D - the 0D space itself.

A one-dimensional space is line. There is nothing (nor is there room for) any other line. Hoever, there is an infinite amount of space for objects of lower dimensions, namely 0D points. Thus, the only line that represents the 1D space itself consists of an infinite number of points, each of which could, in principle, be identified by 1-tuple of coordinates. The coordinates, `(x)`, being a single number `x`, would represent the distance from some arbitrary point on the line, called origin, whose coordinate would be `(0)`. This 1D space, being a line, would model an *axis* of higher-dimensional coordinate systems. Besides, "the line", is there anything else in 1D space, line-like, that is? How should we account for rays and line segments? These rays and line segments would have to live on the line itslef, since that is what the 1D space is. There could be an infinite number of line segments, each of length measured in some arbitrarily unit. There could also be an infinite number of rays (I guess), although there would possibly be large overlaps between them. Somehow, these rays and line segments do not seem so independent and free as they would be in higher dimensions. Then again, even in higher dimensions, rays and line segments also seem artificial as there is always an underlying line "carrying" or "hosting" them, at least one can always be imagined.

The fun starts in the two-dimensional space which is determined by a unique plane. There is no room for other planes here, but there is plenty of space for points, lines, even rays and line segments. They can go wild and arrange themselves in a variaty of flat objects. A point of the 2D space is the updated 1D point - having obtained another dimension it is now described by a 2-tuple, aka by an ordered pair, and has the form `(x, y)`. The plane is usually called Euclidean if the Cartesian coordinate system is overlaid on top of it. Alternatively, a polar coordinate system can be overlaid as well.

Is a 1D point the same thing as a 2D point? Are they essentially the same entity, with the only difference being an additional property of the latter? Removing that extra property shouldn't change its true essence and identity. Isn't an extra dimension, since it is required to *identify* a point, then an inherent aspect of a 3D point?
