# Dual numbers

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dual_number

In mathematical physics, a Grassmann number, named after Hermann Grassmann (also called an anticommuting number or supernumber), is an element of the exterior algebra of a complex vector space. The special case of a 1-dimensional algebra is known as a *dual number*.

In algebra, the dual numbers are a *hypercomplex number system* first introduced in the 19th century.

Dual numbers are expressions of the form `a + bε`, where `a` and `b` are real numbers, and `ε` is a symbol taken to satisfy `ε² = 0` with `ε≠0`.

Dual numbers can be added component-wise, and multiplied by the formula

    (a + bε)(c + dε) = ac + (ad + bc)ε

which follows from the property ε² = 0 and the fact that multiplication is a *bilinear operation*.

The dual numbers form a *commutative algebra of dimension 2 over the reals*, and also an *Artinian local ring*. They are one of the simplest examples of a ring that has *nonzero nilpotent elements*.

## Contents
- 1. History
- 2. Modern definition
- 3. Division
- 4. Matrix representation
- 5. Automatic differentiation
- 6. Geometry
  - 6.1. Cycles
- 7. Applications in mechanics
- 8. Algebraic geometry
- 9. Generalizations
  - 9.1. Arbitrary module of elements of zero square
- 10. Superspace
- 11. Projective line
- 12. See also
- 13. References

## History

Dual numbers were introduced in 1873 by William Clifford, and were used at the beginning of the 20. century by the German mathematician Eduard Study, who used them to represent the dual angle which measures the relative position of two skew lines in space.

Study defined a dual angle as `θ + dε`, where `θ` is the angle between the directions of two lines in 3D space and `d` is a distance between them.

The n-dimensional generalization, the *Grassmann number*, was introduced by Hermann Grassmann in the late 19th century.

## Modern definition

In modern algebra, the algebra of dual numbers is often defined as the quotient of a polynomial ring over ℝ by the *principal ideal* generated by the square of the indeterminate, that is `ℝ[X] / ⟨X²⟩`.

It may also be defined as the exterior algebra of a 1D vector space with `ε` as its basis element.

## Division

Division of dual numbers is defined when the real part of the denominator is non-zero. The division process is analogous to complex division in that the denominator is multiplied by its conjugate in order to cancel the non-real parts.

Therefore, to evaluate an expression of the form `a+bε ÷ c+dε`, we multiply the numerator and denominator by the conjugate of the denominator:

```js
a + bε    (a + bε)(c − dε)    ac − adε + bcε − bdε²   ac − adε + bcε − 0
------- = ----------------- = --------------------- = ------------------
c + dε    (c + dε)(c − dε)    c² + cdε − cdε − d2ε²          c² − 0


  ac + ε(bc − ad)    a     bc − ad
= --------------- = ---- + -------ε
        c²           c       c²
```

which is defined when `c` is non-zero.

If, on the other hand, `c` is zero while `d` is not, then the equation

    a + bε = (x + yε)dε = xdε + 0

- has no solution if `a` is nonzero
- is otherwise solved by any dual number of the form ⁠`b/d + yε`

This means that the non-real part of the "quotient" is arbitrary and division is therefore not defined for purely nonreal dual numbers. Indeed, they are (trivially) zero divisors and clearly form an ideal of the associative algebra (and thus ring) of the dual numbers.

## Matrix representation

The dual number `a + bε` can be represented by the square matrix

    a 0
    b a

In this representation the matrix 

    0 1
    0 0

squares to the zero matrix, corresponding to the dual number `ε`.

Generally, if `ε` is a nilpotent matrix, then `B = {x I + yε | x,y ∈ ℝ}` is a subalgebra isomorphic to the algebra of dual numbers. In the case of 2x2 real matrices M(2,ℝ), `ε` can be taken as any matrix of the form

    a  b
    c -a

with `p = a² + bc = 0`.

The dual numbers are one of 3 isomorphism classes of real 2-algebras in M(2,ℝ). When `p > 0` the subalgebra `B` is isomorphic to split-complex numbers, and when `p < 0`, `B` is isomorphic to the complex plane.

## Automatic differentiation

One application of dual numbers is automatic differentiation. Any polynomial

(1,0,0)*(0,1,0)
|(0,1,0)|
round(1.3254,2)
stdev(1,5,5,10)
