# Mathematical theory

Mathematical knowedge consists of all the various math discilines and fields, but at at any even lower level is the notion of mathematical theory. A theory focuses on a narrow aspect of a math field. For example, set theory is the name of math field that studies and deals with sets, but within this field, there are numerous concrete individual set theories, the most popular of which is ZFC. Sometimes when discussing sets, we may state general things about sets that probably hold in any set theory, but sometimes we have a particular set theory in context of which we are discussing things. Number theory is also an example of a name that names the entire math field within which there exist multiple concrete number theories. For one, natural numbers are usually defined using the Peano's axiom, but real numbers have several competing theories.

It seems that most math fields are not really concerned with having one or more undelying theories that defines the field from the first principles. This is becasue mathematicians working in most fields are not really interesting in that. It is said that everything could be made rigorous and defined from the ground up if someone would insist on it, and most mathematicians leave it at that, prefering to tackle other things then deal with the foundations of their field.

It is to be understood that every field could in principle have at least one theory that defines the math objects of that field. However, some fields don't have one because no one bothered to come up with one, but, in principle, it could be defined. Since ZFC is still considered the foundation of math, that theory would start from sets and derive the math objects of the field.
