# Starting with nothing

Imagine there is nothing but the concept of set, i.e. all we have is the means to construct sets - set constructor of sorts. To construct a set we need objects to use as set elements, but there are none. The domain of discourse (DOD), denoted by `D`, which contains all known objects, is empty. As we construct new sets we'll populate the DOD with them. The DOD itself is a collection but with some set-like properties, meaning that sets do have some properties - and even the lack of properties is a property.

We already know, but we'll eventually discover, that sets have no notion of ordering or multiplicity. Having no notion of order means the elements of a set could be ordered or not - that would be completely unbeknowst to a set. The same with the notion of multiplicity - a set may have multiple instances of the same object, but it wouldn't and couldn't know that. Crucially, we accept that sets have these properties because this is what we discovered ourselves by probing sets (assuming the opaque sets scenario). If sets are opaque objects, we can only ask whether a particular object is a member of some set or not.

The *set membership* is a binary relation between an object and a set. However, since all objects (although right now we have none) will be sets (as we create them), the set membership is actually a relation between two sets. We recognize the membership relation as a primitive and assign it a distictive symbol, `∈`. So, the only thing we can ask of a set is whether a particular object is its member or not. Whether a set contains one or a million and one instances of some specific object `x`, we would get the same answer to the query "is `x` in the set". This query represents a *proposition* - and each proposition has a truth value - it may be true or false. Symbolizing this query in the language of first-order logic we get the most basic kind of proposition, `x ∈ y`.

We can create all kinds of propositions using symbols we have introduced as primitives and those we have subsequentially defined. Another primitive we introduce is *equality*, also a binary relation and symbolized by `=`. With it, we can now create propositions of the form `x = y`.

The important thing to know is that we have the entire machinery of predicate logic at out dysposal before we even create our first set. First-order predicate logic is the language of many mathematical theories, including most set theories. FOL is a step up from *propositional logic* which treats entire sentence as a unit, called proposition, only being able to explore relations between sentences made using logical connectives.

But FOL allows us to destructure sentences further, almost like in liguistics, analyzing a sentence into its constituent components, like subject and predicate. In fact, the subject of FOL sentences, in the context of set theory, is already known - it is the collection of individuals comprising the domain of discourse. Domain of discourse is a part of FOL that collects all the objects under the study. And in set theory, those individuals are sets.
