# Do sets already exist or are they constructed

No set is ever constructed, it already exists, it always have. Building a set is more like recognizing that particular set against the backdrop made of all the other possible sets. The *axiom of comprehension* states that given any property, there is (and always was) a set containing all the objects with that particular property. An object has no say in whether it wants to belong to some set - when its "number" is called, it has no choice but to belong (because it always have).

This position allows anything and everything to constitute a set.



of sets may not even be a multitude at all - only the existence of one concrete set, the empty set, is enough

which may not even constitute a multitude after all, because no other concrete set need exists besides the empty set.


Or maybe there are no other concrete sets but the empty set - as far as many theories are concerned, the empty set alone is good enough, along with an abstract concept of sets that only ever contain other (abstract) sets and the empty set.

In fact, that's exactly how the natural numbers are constructed: zero is the empty set, `0 = ∅`, (it has no elements), one is the set containing the empty set, `1 = {∅}`, (it has 1 element), two is the set containing the previous two, `2 = { ∅, {∅} }` (it has 2 elements), and generally, the set representing the number `n` is the set contaning all the previous numbers (number sets) i.e. `n = {0,1,2,...,n-1}`.

the successor of number `n` is the set contaning all the previous number sets, `S(n) = n U {n}`

Besides the empty set, `∅`, many other sets are considered a separete mathematical object, like the set containing the empty set, `{∅}`, or a set containing the previous two, `{ ∅, {∅} }`. In principle, all the sets under consideration may be constructed (recognized) using this approach.
