# Earliest known uses of some of the words of mathematics

https://jeff560.tripod.com/p.html
https://jeff560.tripod.com/calculus.html

* *Pairwise*. The term appears in P. Jordan; J. v. Neumann; E. Wigner "On an Algebraic Generalization of the Quantum Mechanical Formalism", Annals of Mathematics, 35, (1934), 29-64. The phrase "a set of pairwise orthogonal unit elements" appears on p. 35.

* *Parabola* was probably coined by Apollonius, who, according to Pappus, had terms for all three conic sections. Michael N. Fried says there are two known occasions where Archimedes used the terms "parabola" and "ellipse", but that "these are, most likely, later interpolations rather than Archimedes own terminology". However, G. J. Toomer believes the names *parabola* and *hyperbola* are older than Apollonius, based on an Arabic translation of Diocles's "On burning mirrors".

* *Paraconsistent Logic*. The first formal calculus of inconsistency-tolerant logic was constructed by the Polish logician Stanislaw Jaskowski, who published his paper "Propositional calculus for contradictory deductive systems" (in Polish) in Studia Societatis Scientiarum Torunensis, in 1948. It was reprinted in English in 1969. Newton Carneiro Affonso da Costa, one of the most prominent researchers in paraconsistent logic, referred to it as inconsistent formal systems in his 1964 thesis, which used that term as its title. See the introduction of the work "Sistemas Formais Inconsistentes", Newton C. A. da Costa, Editora da UFPr, Curitiba, 1993. This work is a reprint of the Prof. Newton's original 1964 thesis, the initial landmark of all studies in the matter. The term paraconsistent logic was coined in 1976 by the Peruvian philosopher Francisco Miró Quesada, during the Terceiro Congresso Latino Americano.

* *Paradox* is a label fixed to many arguments in mathematics, like Banach-Tarski Paradox, Hausdorff Paradox, Russell's Paradox, St. Petersburg Paradox, Simpson's Paradox, Zeno's Paradoxes. Paradox (from Greek for "contrary to received opinion") is an exasperatingly ambiguous word and it is not unusual to read statements like, "This is not a paradox at all, the only reason that it is given this name is that it is counter-intuitive". W. V. Quine "Ways of Paradox", 1966, classifies paradoxes, distinguishing 3 types: *veridical paradox* produces a result that appears absurd but is demonstrated to be true nevertheless; e.g. Simpson's Paradox. *Falsidical paradox* produces a result that not only appears false but actually is false; there is a fallacy in the argument; e.g. Zeno's Paradoxes. *Antinomy* (from Greek for "against the law") produces a self-contradiction by accepted ways of reasoning; e.g. Russell's Paradox. Paradoxes have been discussed since antiquity; see The Liar Paradox. In the Middle Ages variants of The Liar Paradox were studied under the heading insolubilia (W. & M. Kneale The Development of Logic, 1962). The early 20th century with its disputes on set theory and logic was the great age for paradoxes. Amongst the antinomies discovered then were those of Burali-Forti, Russell And Richard. *Logical and semantic paradoxes*. F. P. Ramsey pointed out in "Foundations of Mathematics" in Foundations of Mathematics and Other Essays, 1931, that the "*contradictions* fall into two fundamentally distinct groups". Ramsey's Type A are now called the *logical paradoxes*, and his Type B the *semantic paradoxes*: Russell's Paradox is an example of the first and Richard's Paradox an example of the second.

* *Parametric Equation* is found in 1894 in "On the Singularities of the Modular Equations and Curves" by John Stephen Smith in the Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society.

* *Partial Derivative* and *Partial Differential*. Partial derivatives appear in the writings of Newton and Leibniz. Partial differential equation was used in 1770 by Antoine-Nicolas Caritat, Marquis de Condorcet (1743-1794) in the title "Memoire sur les Equations aux différence partielles," which was published in Histoire de L'sAcademie Royale des Sciences, 1773. Partial differential equation appears in English in 1809 in a letter from "Mr. Thomas Knight, Of Papcastle, near Cockermouth" in The Mathematical Repository, New Series, Volume III, 1809. The same issue of The Mathematical Repository contains the expression *partial fluxion*. An early use of the term partial derivative in English is in an 1834 paper by Sir William Rowan Hamilton. Partial differential equation is found in English in 1820 in A Collection of Examples of the Applications of the Differential and Integral Calculus by George Peacock: "Given a solution of a partial differential equation, to find whether it is included in the general solution or not".

See the [Earliest Uses of Symbols of Calculus page](https://jeff560.tripod.com/calculus.html).
