# Algebra :: Abstract Algebra

* Abstract algebra
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_algebra

* Algebraic structure
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algebraic_structure

* List of abstract algebra topics
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_abstract_algebra_topics


* Group
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Group_(mathematics)
* Ring
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ring_(mathematics)
* Field
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Field_(mathematics)
* Module
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Module_(mathematics)
* Vector space
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vector_space
* Algebra over a field
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algebra_over_a_field
* Equivalent definitions of mathematical structures
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Equivalent_definitions_of_mathematical_structures


* Inner automorphism - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inner_automorphism

* Conjugacy class - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conjugacy_class#Conjugacy%20as%20group%20action



* Non-associative algebra - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-associative_algebra

* Associative algebra - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Associative_algebra

* Composition algebra - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Composition_algebra

* Graded ring - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graded_ring

* Bialgebra - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bialgebra

* Hopf algebra - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hopf_algebra

* Group with operators - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Group_with_operators

* Linear algebra - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linear_algebra


* Ring theory - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ring_theory

* Rng (algebra) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rng_(algebra)

* Ring theory - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ring_theory

* Ring (mathematics) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ring_(mathematics)

* Semiring - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semiring

* Near-ring - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Near-ring

* Commutative ring - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commutative_ring

* Integral domain - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integral_domain

* Division ring - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Division_ring

* Field (mathematics) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Field_(mathematics)

* Lie algebra - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lie_algebra#Lie_ring


* Quasigroup - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quasigroup

* Lie group - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lie_group
