# Do sets already exist or are they constructed

No set is ever constructed, it already exists, it always have. Building a set is more like recognizing that particular set against the backdrop made of all the other possible sets.

The **axiom of comprehension** (which is false due to Russell's paradox) states that for any given property, there is a corresponding set, i.e. a set that contains all objects for which that property holds. This allows anything and everything to constitute a set.

An object has no say in whether it wants to belong to a set - when its "number" is called, it has no choice but to belong (because it always have).




Only the existence of the empty set is sufficient to construct plethora of distinct sets.

There are no other building blocks but the empty set - the empty set alone is sufficient, along with an *abstract concept of sets* that only ever contains other (abstract) sets and the empty set.

In fact, that's exactly how the natural numbers are constructed: zero is the empty set, `0 = ∅`, (it has no elements), one is the set containing the empty set, `1 = {∅}`, (it has 1 element), two is the set containing the previous two, `2 = { ∅, {∅} }` (it has 2 elements), and generally, the set representing the number `n` is the set contaning all the previous numbers (number sets) i.e. `n = {0,1,2,...,n-1}`.

the successor of number `n` is the set contaning all the previous number sets, `S(n) = n U {n}`

Besides the empty set, `∅`, many other sets are considered a separete mathematical object, like the set containing the empty set, `{∅}`, or a set containing the previous two, `{ ∅, {∅} }`. In principle, all the sets under consideration may be constructed (recognized) using this approach.
