# Index of Relations

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_set_identities_and_relations
https://en.wikiversity.org/w/index.php?title=Category:Relation_Theory&action=edit&redlink=1


antireflexive relation
antisymmetric relation
antitransitive relation
asymmetric relation
binary relation
congruence relation
connected relation
connex relation
coreflexive relation
empty relation
equality relation
equivalence relation
finitary relation
functional relation
has-joins relation
has-meets relation
heterogeneous relation
homogeneous relation
identity relation
inclusion relation
infinitary relation
intransitive relation
irreflexive relation
join-semilattice relation
k-ary relation
lattice relation
left total relation
left-serial relation
left-unique relation
meet-semilattice relation
membership relation
null relation
partial order relation
pre-well-ordering relation
preorder (quasiorder) relation
quasireflexive relation
reflexive relation
relation operation
relation composition
relation complement
relation negation
relation converse
relation reduction
relation transposition
right total relation
right-serial relation
right-unique relation
serial relation
sign relation
symmetric relation
ternary relation
total order relation
total preorder relation
total relation
transitive relation
triadic relation
trichotomy relation
unary relation
unique relation
uniqueness relation
universal relation
well-founded relation
well-ordering relation
well-quasi-ordering relation
