# Magma

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magma_(algebra)

A **magma** (sometimes *binar*) is a basic kind of algebraic structure that consists of a carrier set equipped with a single binary operation that must be closed over the carrier set. No other properties are imposed.

A magma

`(S, ∙)`

is a carrier set, `S`, with a single binary operation

`(∙) : S ⨯ S -> S`

closed over the carrier set

`∀a,b ∈ S. a ∙ b ∈ S`

The only property that a magma must enforce is that its binary operation is closed (or total) over the carrier set. This is called *the axiom of closure or totality*. No other axioms are imposed.

If `•` is instead a *partial operation*, then `(S, •)` is called a **partial magma** or more often a **partial groupoid**.


A magma is usually classified with the group-like algebraic structures, where a *pure (bare) magma* is a structure stripped of all the group axioms (closure, associativity, identity, inverse) except the closure. Commuative groups are called Abelian groups, so a pure magma also lacks commutativity. But, starting with a magma other group-like structure are formed:
- semigroup:      magma + associativity
- monoid:         magma + associativity + identity
- group:          magma + associativity + identity + inverse
- Abelian group:  magma + associativity + identity + inverse + commutativity

Therefore, a pure magma that additionaly satisfies only associativity is called a semigroup, rather than an associative magma. However, the name *associative magma* may be used either to emphasize associativity of a pure magma, or to emphasize the fact that one of the properties that augment a magma is associativity.

Any algebraic structures with the axiom of closure is basically a magma. So, a magma is the most common denominator among many algebras.


## Types of magma

Magmas are not often studied per se; instead there are several different types of magmas, depending on what axioms are satisfied.

Commonly studied types of magma include:

* *Quasigroup*: divisibility (division is always possible)
* *Loop*: quasigroup with identity (identity, divisibility)
* Semigroup: magma where the operation is associative
* Inverse semigroup: semigroup with inverse
* Semilattice: semigroup where the operation is commutative and idempotent
* Monoid: A semigroup with an identity element
* Group: A monoid with inverse elements; equivalently, an associative loop, or a non-empty associative quasigroup
* Abelian group: A group where the operation is commutative

Note that each of divisibility and invertibility imply the cancellation property.

# Classification of magmas by properties

- Medial
- Left semimedial
- Right semimedial
- Semimedial
- Trimedial
- Entropic
- Left distributive
- Right distributive
- Autodistributive
- Commutative
- Idempotent
- Unipotent
- Zeropotent
- Alternative
- Power-associative
- Flexible
- A semigroup, or associative
- A left unar
- A right unar
- Semigroup with zero multiplication, or null semigroup
- Unital
- Left-cancellative
- Right-cancellative
- Cancellative
- A semigroup with left zeros
- A semigroup with right zeros



A magma `(S, •)`, with `x,y,u,z ∈ S` is called:

- **Medial**            if `xy • uz ≡ xu • yz`
- **Left semimedial**   if `xx • yz ≡ xy • xz`
- **Right semimedial**  if `yz • xx ≡ yx • zx`
- **Semimedial** if it is left and right semimedial
- **Trimedial**  if any triple of (not necessarily distinct) elements generates a medial submagma
- **Entropic**   if it is a homomorphic image of a medial cancellation magma

- **Left distributive**  if `x • yz ≡ xy • xz`
- **Right distributive** if `yz • x ≡ yx • zx`
- **Autodistributive** if it is left and right distributive
- **Commutative** if `xy ≡ yx`
- **Idempotent**  if `xx ≡ x`
- **Unipotent**   if `xx ≡ yy`
- **Zeropotent**  if `xx • y` ≡ `xx` ≡ `y • xx`
- **Alternative** if `xx • y` ≡ `x • xy` and `x • yy` ≡ `xy • y`
- **Power-associative** if a submagma generated by any element is associative
- **Flexible** if `xy • x` ≡ `x • yx`
- **associative** (or a semigroup) if `x • yz` ≡ `xy • z`
- **left unar**  if `xy` ≡ `xz`
- **right unar** if `yx` ≡ `zx`
- **null semigroup** *semigroup with zero multiplication* if `xy ≡ uv`
- **Unital** if it has an identity element
- **Left-cancellative**  if `∀xyz. xy = xz => y = z`
- **Right-cancellative** if `∀xyz. yx = zx => y = z`
- **Cancellative**       if right-cancellative and left-cancellative
- *semigroup with left zeros*  if it is a semigroup and `∀x. x ≡ xy`
- *semigroup with right zeros* if it is a semigroup and `∀x. x ≡ yx`


# Magma

Magma is a basic kind of algebraic structure, consisting of a set equipped with a single binary operation which must be closed over the set.

A magma is a set `M` matched with an operation, `•`, that sends any two elements `a,b ∈ M` to another element, `a • b ∈ M`.

The symbol, `•`, is a general placeholder for a properly defined operation. To qualify as a magma, the set and operation (M, •) must satisfy the following requirement (known as the magma or closure axiom):

For all $$a, b$$ in $$M$$, the result of the operation $$a \cdot b$$ is also in $$M$$; in mathematical notation: 

$$\display{a,b \in M \implies a \cdot b\in M}$$

If $$\cdot$$ is instead a partial operation, then $$S$$ is called a *partial magma* or more often a *partial groupoid*.
