# Mathematics :: General :: About

* Mathematics is a field of study that discovers and organizes methods, theories and theorems which are initially developed and proved as part of a pure mathematical investigation but later found practical application in other sciences.

* Mathematics is the study of patterns. Mathematics investigates abstract concepts like quantity, space and change. Mathematics studies abstract structures such as relations and orders, but also logical reasoning and computation.

* The term "mathematics" comes from the Ancient Greek `μάθημα` (máthēma) "knowledge", "study", "learning". The word "arithmetic" is also rooted in Ancient Greek's `αριθμητική` (arithmetiki), a compound of `ἀριθμός` (arithmos) "number" and `τέχνη, -τική` (tehne, -tiki) "art", "skill", "craft".

* Mathematics is the science of expressing and studying the relationships between quantities, magnitudes and more general abstract concepts. Math also embraces logical reasoning based on definitions, axioms, assumptions and rules for combining and transforming primitive notions into more complex objects, relations and theorems.

* While other sciences describe various aspects of the objective reality, mathematics plays out on a different stage, in the mind; it is the only possibly stage for exercising mathematics since mathematical objects don't exist in nature. Numbers and geometrical objects (and, later, many other mathematical objects as well) are not the things that can be found in the objective reality. No one has even seen a number 5 or an absolutely perfect circle, let alone proved their existence. Yet people take them for granted, as a commonplace, and talk about them like it's 1899. These ideals owe their unwordly perfection to the belief alone; in fact, their entire existence depends on our belief, which is the point mathematics shares with religion (therefore, mathematics is a religion).

* Mathematics began as a study of quantity and shapes and for a long time it was primarily concerned with geometry and numbers.

* Unlike other sciences, that deal with questions around "what is" and "what was", mathematics is only interested in "_what must be_" (*es muss sein*). It would be surprising to discover a non-carbon-based lifeform, but it would be something else entirely to discover a non-π-based circle in the Euclidean plane.


* Speaking of the Euclidean plane, one of the factors that initiated the late XIX century's movement to axiomatize all of mathematics, was the discovery of other geometries. Before that discovery, there was only one geometry, now called Euclidean, that was established by Euclid in the IV century BCE, in his book "Elemenets", which was used as the main textbook for geometry classes in academias across Europe, for the next two millenia (and it is the all time's second most published book). "Elements" are the prime example of rigourous mathematical axiomatization: Euclid starts by declaring his 5 axioms, and then proceeded to derive numerous theorems concerning geometry based solely on these 5 axioms. With that, Euclid had established *the mathematical method*, the methodology used to buid a mathematical theory, practiced still today. It was his fifth axiom, about parallel lines, that other mathematicians picked on only to eventually reveal other kinds of geometries.

* When the concern to axiomatize mathematics was raised in the late XIX century, many areas (of modern math that then existed), paricularly the number theory, which was practically the focal point of mathematical investigation, were already deeply established, so the process of axiomatization was reversed and needed to work its way backwards, from the existing body of knowledge, *back to the first principles*.

* As in any theory, it was particularly *important to come up with the most basic notion pertaining to mathematics*. Although the concept of a number seems a likely winner for the prestiguous role of the most basic mathematical notion, the candidate coming from the newly invented set theory was deemed a better one. After all, sets are more abstract then numbers, and it this case that is the advantage. However, it seems there will always be issues to address, regardless of which notion is considered the most basic mathematical primitive.

* Geometry is based around the notion of a *dimensionless point*, used as a basic building block for the higher-dimension objects. A line is a set of points. A line is considered a 1-dimansional object; but the question of where does that dimension came from (considering that a line is just a set of dimensionless points) has exiled a line into primitives.

* The *process of axiomatization* normally starts with a blank slate, sort to speak. The most fundamental notion, central to the theory that is about to be built, must be properly identified, since this is the notion that axioms, determined in the next step, are to support. Having more than one central notion is possible, but it's prefered to keep things simple and single. After identifying the central concept and declaring the set of axioms, all the other notions pertaining to a theory are derived from there, until the entire theory is constructed. Only the primitives and the axioms get a pass, all the other concepts must be rigourously argumented for.

* A *mathematical theory* and its argumentation assumes a certain level of abstraction. A theory is established on the selection of a basic set of primitive notions, possibly drew from a larger set of generally accepted primitives, and characterized by the granulation of reasoning steps. The contents and the aim of an argument determines mainly the primitive notions, while the expertise of the parties involved determines the granulation degree of the reasoning steps.

* The credibility of a *mathematical argument* can be enhanced by recognising patterns of logical reasoning as independent from the contents of the argument and by verifying that these reasoning steps are applications of some sound logical rules. Here, a collection of logical rules are called sound if no contradiction follows from the rules. Ultimately, one can formalise mathematical arguments as follows. First, a language of mathematical statements is agreed upon. This language formally represents natural language sentences in an unambiguous way. Next, a collection of logical axioms (statements known to be true) and rules are singled out and verified to be sound. When isolating logical axioms and rules, one preferably chooses a minimal collection, from which other necessary statements can be derived. Finally, a mathematical argument is translated into the formal language and it is verified that the logical steps in the argument are performed in accordance with the logical axioms and rules.

* In type theories a *deductive method of reasoning* can be formalised, in which an argument is considered true if at each stage of the argument the current statement follows logically from the statements that preceded it.

* Mathematics is a discipline of logic where any issue, no matter how weird or useless, is addressed, and most questions can be answered, if not swiftly then at least decisively. This is in stark constrast to, well, pretty much any other aspect of the human experience, primarily politics. What really goes on in politics, who's driving the world in, who's the man behind the man behind the man behind the throne, will never know -- but if it's a mathematical conundrum -- then the truth can be acquired, it's obtainable. There's no room for drama and other futile human emotions, sensitivity and PC -- only the argument has weight, everything else, especially the person that utters it, don't matter. In fact, there is a huge list of logical fallicies categorizing all the ways in which humans are fallible; were it enforced as a law to constrain public (political) discussion, we'd be better off.

* "Mathematics, rightly viewed, possesses not only truth but supreme beauty -- a beauty cold and austere, like that of sculpture, without appeal to any part of our weaker nature, without the gorgeous trappings of painting or music, yet sublimely pure, and capable of a stern perfection such as only the greatest art can show." -- Bertrand "Dox" Russell

* "Keen minds seeking to establish new systems of thought on the basis of certain cogent knowledge were attracted by the certitude of mathematics, for the truths of mathematics had really never been challenged or been subject to the slightest doubt by the true scholars. Moreover, mathematical demonstrations carried with them a compulsion and an assurance that had not been equaled in science, philosophy, or religion." -- Morris Kline
