# Numerals

Numeral systems
- Place-value notation
- Sign-value notation

List of numeral systems
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_numeral_systems

List of types of numbers
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_types_of_numbers

List of types of numbers
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_types_of_numbers

List of numeral systems - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_numeral_systems


* Natural Number -- from Wolfram MathWorld
https://mathworld.wolfram.com/NaturalNumber.html

* Rational Number -- from Wolfram MathWorld
https://mathworld.wolfram.com/RationalNumber.html

* Numeral system - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Numeral_system

* Perfect number - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perfect_number

* Number theory - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Number_theory

* Aliquot sum - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aliquot_sum

* Divisor function - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Divisor_function

* Mersenne prime - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mersenne_prime

* Euclid-Euler theorem - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euclid%E2%80%93Euler_theorem

* All even perfect numbers are a power of two times a Mersenne prime
https://primes.utm.edu/notes/proofs/EvenPerfect.html

* Ordinal number - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ordinal_number

* Ordinal numeral - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ordinal_numeral

* Distributive numeral - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Distributive_numeral

* English numerals - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/English_numerals#Ordinal_numbers

* Multiplier (linguistics) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiplier_(linguistics)

* Ordinal indicator - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ordinal_indicator

* Cardinal numeral - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cardinal_numeral

* Distributive numeral - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Distributive_numeral

* Grammatical number - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grammatical_number#Distributive_plural

* Cardinal number - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cardinal_number

* Valency (linguistics) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Valency_(linguistics)

* Numeral (linguistics) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Numeral_(linguistics)
