# Everything is a set

>If one agrees that set theory (ZFC) is an appealing foundation of mathematics, then all mathematical objects must be defined as sets.

Most mathematicians are not in the slighest interested in whether the objects of their chosen field are definable as sets; they have better things to do. However, every field of math does have a subfield that deals with the foundations, plus there is a separate, general (and catch-all) field called *The Foundations Of Mathematics* that serves as the central hub for these issues. One of its tasks is identifying the root object that underpins all of mathematics and from which all other mathematical objects can be derived. Today, still, that object is *set* since *set theory* (concretely ZFC) is considered by the majority of mathematicians as the foundation of mathematics; set theory is the foundational theory of mathematics. This puts a huge burdon on ZFC set theory since it must demonstrate how to derive all of math from sets. The only objects in ZFC are sets, therefore, the only "true" objects of math are sets.

Meanwhile, in reality, plenty of different mathematical objects exist due to a convention (a "law") which says that as soon as a new mathematical object is defined, it ceases to be identified with sets, becoming an independent, standalone *object in its own right*. The phrase "object in its own right" is encountered in text across the board. This independence goes as far that many authors frequently underline the difference between sets and the new object. For example, in many text, as soon as the Kuratowski's definition of an ordered pair is presented, it is customary to emphasize that sets and ordered pairs are distinct objects. The definition of an ordered pair on which the mathematical community have settled is one by Kuratowski: `(a, b) := {{a}, {a, b}}`. But since comparing ordered pairs to sets is immediately alikened to comparing apples and oranges, it follows that the ordered pair `(a, b)` has nothing to do with the set `{{a}, {a, b}}`. The force of abstraction was so strong it forgot its implementation details.
