# Non-extensionality of lambda calculus

Set theory treats functions as sets: a function is a set of arg-value pairs. A function is a set of ordered pairs, satisfying `(x,y₁) ∈ f ⋀ (x,y₂) ∈ f -> y₁ = y₂`. If `f` is a function, and `(x,y) ∈ f`, then `f(x) = y` (`f` assigns value `y` to arg `x`). Under this concept, the notion of equality of functions is realized by *equality qua sets*. Equality of sets is extensional - two sets are equal when they contain the same elements (their elements are their extension). Under this principle of extensionality, two functions are equal when they define the same set; when they contain the same ordered pairs as elements. They are identical if they assign the same value to the same arg. In this sense, **functions-as-sets are extensional objects**.

In contrast to the concept of functions-as-sets of set theory, the concept of functions in lambda calculus is *functions-as-rules*. A function is given by a rule that says how to determine its value from the arg. We can view the lambda term `λx.M` as a description of an operation that, given `x`, produces `M`. The body of the abstraction, `M`, is essentially a rule for what to do with `x`. In general, given rules `M` and `N`, we can't decide if `λx.M` is equal to `λx.N`. The two terms might behave the same (have the same value given the same args), but it may not be clear what resources are needed for showing the equality of the terms. In this sense, **functions-as-rules are non-extensional objects**.

To distinguish the extensional concept of functions-as-sets from the non-extensional concept of functions-as-rules, the latter is often referred to as an *intensional function concept*, in part because of the ostensibly intensional concept of a rule involved. From the perspective of the philosophy of language, this terminology can be somewhat misleading, since in this context, the **extensional-intensional distinction** has a slightly different meaning.

In the standard, "possible-worlds", framework of philosophical semantics, we distinguish between an extensional and an intensional function concept as follows: let's say that that two functions are *extensionally equivalent at a world* iff they assign the same values to the same args at that world; and let's say that two functions are *intensionally equivalent* iff they assign the same values to the same args at *every possible-world*.

To illustrate, consider the functions highest-mountain-on-earth (`e`) and highest-mountain-in-the-Himalayas (`h`), where `e` assigns the highest mountain on Earth as the value to every arg, and `h` assigns the highest mountain in the Himalayas as the value to every arg. *These two functions are extensionally equivalent (at the actual world), but not intensionally so*. At the actual world, they assign the same value to every arg (namely, Mt. Everest).

Now consider a world where Mt. Everest is not the highest mountain on Earth, but say, Mt. Rushmore is. Suppose further that this is so, just because Mt. Rushmore is 9100 m higher than it is at the actual world, while Mt. Everest, with its roughly 8800 m, is still the highest mountain in the Himalayas. Then, at that world, `e` assigns Mt. Rushmore as the value to each arg, while `h` still assigns Mt. Everest. In other words, the functions are now *extensionally equivalent (at the actual world) but not intensionally equivalent*.

A function concept may now be called *extensional* iff it requires functions that are extensionally equivalent at the actual world to be identical. And a function concept may be classified as *intensional* iff it requires intensionally equivalent functions to be identical.

Note that these classifications are conceptually different from the distinctions commonly used in the foundations of mathematics. On the terminology used in the foundations of mathematics, functions-as-sets are classified as extensional since they use the axiom of extensionality as their criterion of identity, and functions-as-rules are classified as intensional because they rely on the ostensibly intensional concept of a rule. In the present possible-worlds terminology, function concepts are classified as extensional or intensional based of their behavior at possible-worlds.


An issue from which conceptual confusion might arise is that the two terminologies potentially pass different verdicts on the function concept at work in the LC. To see this, consider the following two functions:
- `f := λx. x + 1`
- `g := λx. x + 2 - 1`

These two functions are clearly extensionally equivalent: they assign the same value to the same input at the actual world. Moreover, given standard assumptions in possible worlds semantics, the two functions are also *intensionally equivalent*. If we assume that mathematical facts, like facts about addition and subtraction, are necessary in the sense that they are the same at every possible world, then we get that the two functions give the same value to the arguments at *every possible world*. So, an intensional function concept would require the two functions to be identical.

In the LC, however, it's not clear that we should identify the two functions. Formally speaking, without the help of other principle, we cannot show that the two λ-terms denote the same function. Moreover, informally speaking, on the conception of functions-as-rules, it's not even clear that we should identify them: the two terms involve genuinely different rules, and so we might be tempted to say that they denote different functions.

A function concept that allows for intensionally equivalent functions to be distinct is called **hyperintensional**. The point is that in possible-worlds terminology, the function concept at work in the LC may be regarded not as intentional but hyperintensional - in contrast to what the terminology common in the foundations of mathematics says. Note that it's unclear how an intensional semantic framework, like the possible-worlds framework, could even in principle account for a non-intensional function concept.

The point here was simply to clarify any conceptual confusions that might arise from different terminologies at play in philosophical discourse. The *hyperintensionality of the LC* is particularly important when it comes to its applications as a theory of not only functions, but more generally n-ary relations. It is effectively the hyperintensionality of the LC that makes it an attractive tool in this context. It should be noted, however, that the LC can be made extensional (as well as intensional) by postulating additional laws concerning the equality of λ-terms.
