# Universal set

In set theory, a **universal set** is a set which contains all objects, *including itself*.

In set theory as "usually" formulated, it can be proven in multiple ways that a universal set does not exist (its existence leads to paradoxes).

However, some non-standard variants of set theory include a universal set.




## Refs

Universe (mathematics) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universe_(mathematics)

Universal set - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_set

Constructible universe - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constructible_universe

Von Neumann universe - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Von_Neumann_universe

Transitive set - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transitive_set#Transitive_closure

Hereditary property - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hereditary_property

Supertransitive class - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Supertransitive_class

Amorphous set - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amorphous_set

Von Neumann-Bernays-Gödel set theory - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Von_Neumann%E2%80%93Bernays%E2%80%93G%C3%B6del_set_theory

Proving Peano Arithmetic with Set Theory (Series Intro) - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FmRZFTwQbo8&list=PLz0n_SjOttTfC7HFuIzCDg1k8h3vMx4BG&index=66


---

OneTab
chrome-extension://chphlpgkkbolifaimnlloiipkdnihall/onetab.html

Bookmarks
chrome://bookmarks/?id=84907

Turing Machines - what are they? + Formal Definition - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j0bIxPqlYLE&list=PLylTVsqZiRXN3Q86XJV6OWOmIzvVZs75E&index=90

Proving Peano Arithmetic with Set Theory (Series Intro) - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FmRZFTwQbo8&list=PLz0n_SjOttTfC7HFuIzCDg1k8h3vMx4BG&index=66

Set theory - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Set_theory

Transitive set - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transitive_set#Transitive_closure

List of axioms - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_axioms

Von Neumann-Bernays-Gödel set theory - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Von_Neumann%E2%80%93Bernays%E2%80%93G%C3%B6del_set_theory

Inner model - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inner_model

Interpretability - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interpretability

Universe (mathematics) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universe_(mathematics)

Universal set - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_set

Von Neumann-Bernays-Gödel set theory - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Von_Neumann%E2%80%93Bernays%E2%80%93G%C3%B6del_set_theory
